= Gallery 2 Pre-Installer =
== A Tiny Tool to Put Gallery 2 on your Webserver ==

Installing Gallery 2 with the preinstaller on your webserver is as simple as:
# Download the Gallery 2 Pre-Installer and put a single file on your webserver
# After two clicks, Gallery 2 is ready to be configured.

This is a great alternative for users who do not have the option of extracting .zip or .tar files directly on the webserver. 
Our advice would be to [http://galleryproject.org/wiki/Web_Hosting_Referral_Page switch to a better web host] in such a case: better doesn't always mean more expensive. But if you want or need to stick with your current webhost that only offers FTP access or another simple web-transfer method, you should definitely use the Gallery 2 Pre-Installer since uploading all Gallery 2 files and directories can take a long time and is very error-prone when using a bad FTP connection.

'''Note:''' If you use the Gallery 2 Pre-Installer to get a Gallery 2 Instance onto your webserver, all your files and folders will be owned by the webserver user and not by your account on the webserver. This complicates upgrading to future Gallery 2 versions a little bit, but Gallery 2 ships with an easy to use tool that allows you to resolve that problem with a single click.

'''Download: [https://github.com/dakanji/G2Project-preinstaller Download Now!]'''

== Installation Instructions  - Usage ==
And here's the whole truth...all steps in detail:
# Download the Gallery 2 Pre-Installer to your computer. [https://github.com/dakanji/G2Project-preinstaller GET IT HERE]
# Extract the gallery2-preinstaller-1.0.zip file.
# Open the extracted preinstall.php in Wordpad, notepad or another texteditor.
# Enter a password at the top of the file.
# Upload preinstall.php via FTP or another method to your webserver, e.g. to <nowiki>http://www.yourwebsite.com/preinstall.php</nowiki>
# Use your FTP program to change the permissions of the folder where preinstall.php is in to 777 (read+write+execute permission for everybody).
# Browse with your webbrowser to the location where you have uploaded preinstall, in our example that would be <nowiki>http://www.yourwebsite.com/preinstall.php</nowiki>
# Enter the password that you just added to preinstall.php in the web form.
# Click the download button to transfer the latest version of Gallery 2 to your webserver. Depending on your webserver this step can take only a second or up to ~15 minutes.
# Click the extract button to extract the Gallery 2 archive directly on the webserver. This step can take a few minutes.
# Follow the link to the Gallery 2 installer which will guide you through the storage folder and database setup steps.
# For security reasons, don't forget to change the permissions of the folder where preinstall.php is in back to 755 (read+exectute for everyone, read+write+execute for the owner). 

'''Note:''' In the Gallery installer (The 11 step wizard which you go through once you are finished with the Gallery 2 Pre-Installer), it is very important that you choose a Gallery storage folder that is outside of your gallery2 folder. It makes your life a lot easier!

== Upgrading ==
=== Upgrading a normal installation using the Gallery 2 Pre-Installer ===
# With your FTP program, move your gallery folder to e.g. gallery_old.
# Use the preinstall.php script to get a Gallery 2 Instance onto your webserver.
# If necessary, use the preinstall.php script to rename your gallery2 folder to e.g. gallery.
# Copy config.php and .htaccess to your new gallery folder.
# Run the upgrader as usual (browse to your gallery, it will start automatically).

=== Upgrading a Gallery 2 Instance Installed with the Gallery 2 Pre-Installer ===
# Use the chmod tool of your Gallery 2 (<nowiki>http://www.example.com/gallery2/lib/support/index.php?chmod</nowiki>) to prepare your gallery folder for the upgrade (open up the filesystem permissions). 
# Put the preinstall.php script into the same folder as your Gallery folder is in (not into gallery2/main.php. Put it one folder higher.)
# If your Gallery folder is not "gallery2", use the preinstall.php script to rename your old Gallery folder to gallery2
# Use the preinstall.php script to get the latest Gallery 2 version onto server. (Download)
# Use the preinstall.php script to extract the new version over your existing gallery2 folder.
# Use preinstall.php to rename gallery2 to your original folder name, if you had a different name.
# Delete preinstall.php (leaving it on your server poses a security risk).
# Run the upgrader as usual (browse to your gallery, it will start automatically).
# Use the chmod tool (lib/support/) to secure your Gallery folder again. Maybe also click "fix Gallery Storage folder" after securing the Gallery folder.

=== Switching from a Gallery 2 Instance Installed with the Gallery 2 Pre-Installer to a Standard Installation ===
# Use the chmod tool of your Gallery 2 Instance (<nowiki>http://www.example.com/gallery2/lib/support/index.php?chmod</nowiki>) to prepare your gallery folder for the upgrade (open up the filesystem permissions). 
# Rename your Gallery folder to something like gallery_old
# Put your new Gallery folder on the webserver with whatever non-Pre-Installer method (FTP, CVS, ssh, ...) since you want to get rid of a "server-owned"  Gallery 2 Instance.
# Copy config.php and .htaccess from your old to your new Gallery folder.
# Maybe the new Gallery folder is also a new version of  Gallery 2, if so, run the upgrader.
# Make sure everything is working when using your new folder.
# If so, you can now safely delete your old gallery_old folder.

== FAQ == 
=== Which download method should I choose? ===
All of them work. If available, choose Curl or wget since they are pretty efficient. Fsockopen and fopen on the other hand are the better job if the download takes a long time on your server and if wget and cURL time out for you.

=== Which extract method should I choose? ===
If available, go with any of the zip methods or with the PHP based tar. The tar binary could have some problems with very long paths.

=== Where is the chmod tool in Gallery 2? ===
The tool to change file permissions (change mode or short "chmod") is in <nowiki>http://www.example.com/gallery2/lib/support/index.php?chmod</nowiki>. 

Also see: [https://github.com/dakanji/G2Project-preinstaller#How_can_I_fix_the_filesystem_permissions_of_the_Gallery_storage_folder.3F How can I fix the filesystem permissions of the Gallery storage folder?]

=== How can I upload a theme or module via FTP when I used the preinstaller? ===
See: Gallery 2 FAQ: [https://github.com/dakanji/G2Project-preinstaller#how-can-i-upload-a-theme-or-module-via-ftp-when-i-used-the-gallery-2-pre-iinstaller How can I upload a theme or module via FTP when I used the Gallery 2 Pre-Iinstaller?]

=== The chmod tool does not work, what's wrong? ===
The chmod tool can only change the filesystem permissions of files and folders that are owned by the webserver. Probably, some or all of your files / folders are owned by your account. If you don't use the Gallery 2 Pre-Installer anyway, just forget about the chmod tool. Probably you don't need it. If you are a Gallery 2 Pre-Installer user and need it to work, ask your webhost to run 'chown -R www /path/to/your/gallery/' since maybe your webhost accidentally changed the owner when restoring a backup or because they thought that was the right thing to do.

=== How can I fix the filesystem permissions of the Gallery storage folder? ===
Usually you get either an ERROR_PLATFORM_FAILURE or the upgrade wizard reports that the filesystem permissions are wrong for your storage folder, i.e. it can't write to all files and subfolders in that folder anymore.

* To fix the problem, you can try the ''Fix the storage folder (make it writeable)'' tool in <nowiki>http://example.com/gallery2/lib/support/</nowiki> on the ''Filesystem Permissions'' page.

* You can also try to change the permissions to 777 (read & writeable for everyone) with your FTP program. If all fails, please ask in the forum for help such that we can verify that it is indeed a filesystem permissions problem. If it actually is one, you'll have to ask your webhost to change the filesystem permissions '''recursively''' for you (e.g. chmod -R 777 g2data).

* What might help is removing all cached data from the storage folder. Please see: [http://codex.galleryproject.org/G2:FAQ#How_can_I_clear_cached_data.3F How can I clear cached data?]

* A common issue is:
 Error (ERROR_PLATFORM_FAILURE) :
 in modules/core/classes/GalleryTemplate.class at line 270 (gallerycoreapi::error)
 in modules/core/classes/GalleryTemplate.class at line 200 (gallerytemplate::_initcompiledtemplatedir)
In that case, if the above suggestions do not help, please try to delete g2data/smarty/templates_c/ folder via FTP or whatever tool you use to upload / manage files of your website.

* If the problem does not disappear or is reappearing after it has been fixed for a while, please ask your webhost whether there are any scripts that change the owner of the files to the account owner. This could be the culprit since files are not created / managed by your account, but by the webserver application. We also welcome you to consult the Gallery Support Forum for further expert advice.

=== How can I upload a theme or module via FTP when I used the Gallery 2 Pre-Iinstaller? ===
If you installed Gallery 2 with the Gallery 2 Pre-Installer, you need to first open the modules/ and themes/ directory for access before you can upload a theme or module manually yourself.
# Go to {{exampleurl|/lib/support/index.php}}, sign in with your Gallery 2 setup password and follow the "Filesystem Permissions" link.
# Click on "Add a new module or theme (make modules/ & themes/ writeable)" to open up your themes/ and modules/ folders.
# Now you can upload your theme or module via FTP.
# Finally don't forget to "close" the themes/ and modules/ folders again on the "Filesystem Permissions" page.

* Note that you can fetch new modules and themes directly via the Site Admin -> Plugins page. FTP is not needed unless for modules and themes that are not in the available repositories.
